February, 2025 notes (#363)
tc39/tc39-notes: meetings/2025-02/february-19.md

# 106th TC39 Meeting | 19 February 2025

**Attendees:**

| Name             | Abbreviation | Organization       |

> |------------------|--------------|--------------------|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|------------------|--------------|--------------------|
| Kevin Gibbons    | KG           | F5                 |
```

| Waldemar Horwat  | WH           | Invited Expert     |
| Ujjwal Sharma    | USA          | Igalia             |
| Andreu Botella   | ABO          | Igalia             |
| Daniel Ehrenberg | DE           | Bloomberg          |
| Philip Chimento  | PFC          | Igalia             |
| Luis Pardo       | LFP          | Microsoft          |
| Michael Saboff   | MLS          | Apple Inc          |
| Linus Groh       | LGH          | Bloomberg          |
| Erik Marks       | REK          | Consensys          |
| Shane F Carr     | SFC          | Google             |
| Chip Morningstar | CM           | Consensys          |
| Daniel Minor     | DLM          | Mozilla            |
| Sergey Rubanov   | SRV          | Invited Expert     |
| Justin Grant     | JGT          | Invited Expert     |
| Ron Buckton      | RBN          | Microsoft          |
| Nicolò Ribaudo   | NRO          | Igalia             |
| Jesse Alama      | JMN          | Igalia             |
| Samina Husain    | SHN          | Ecma               |
| Istvan Sebestyen | IS           | Ecma               |
| Eemeli Aro       | EAO          | Mozilla            |
| Aki Rose Braun   | AKI          | Ecma International |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| J. S. Choi       | JSC          | Invited Expert      |

```
I was present on Wednesday; apologies for not spotting this omission earlier.

MAG: That’s what our implementation does today and it makes perfect sense. And it is a design that people may have different opinions, but I agree.

JHD: Yeah, with that on the record, better to ship it than—Stage 1 is fine. Web compat is a problem.

DE: I think this is a really good proposal. There’s a lot going on with errors that is hard to unify between browsers and the things that JavaScript engines in general and the things that we can, we really should specify. It’s great to get capturing the stack trace faster. We have use cases inside of Bloomberg where we want to capture the stack trace and turn errors lower. So I support Stage 1.

MM: So, yes, support Stage 1 with data property.

MAG: With that, I can cede my time and I can jump ahead if we want.

CDA: Any objections to Stage 1 for captured stack trace? You have Stage 1. All right.

### Speaker's Summary of Key Points

It sounds like most people would strongly prefer that 1) this produces a data property 2) That this does not interfere with or touch the `[[ErrorData]]` internal slot should it exist. I will pursue those choices.

### Conclusion

Stage 1 advanced

> ## Meta discussion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Discussion about shipping non-standard features
```
maybe? "meta discussion" isn't very informative.

* With “fixed” no longer taken, we could rename “stabilize” to “fixed”, which was its original name circa 2010. Though we should not spend energy bikeshedding until we know if this is even possible.

### Conclusion

* We do not unbundle non-extensible, even though that means a loss of virtualizable (in a corner case no one will care about).
* Only a major browser can measure whether we can bundle “fixed” into “non-extensible”. Google already has usage counters going to help us decide (yay!).
* Only a major browser can measure whether we can fix the override mistake globally for the language with carve-outs for the narrow exceptions we find (only legacy lowdash so far). Google may do so (yay!).
* If all this works out, we only have “non-trapping”, which becomes the root trait whose name is TBD (“stabilize”? “fixed”?).
* “non-trapping” would address a major source of reentrancy hazards via proxies, without threatening proxy transparency!

## Records and Tuples future directions

Presenter: Ashley Claymore (ACE)

* [proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple)
* [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/)

> ACE: Hi, everyone. It’s been a while since we talked about Records and Tuples. Almost a year. I thought it would be a good one first to chat about it again. So it’s like technically Stage 2 proposal, but let’s not worry about that too much. They noticed that whenever a TC39 proposal makes it on to hacker news, it’s almost investible you can put money on someone in the comments will be asking about the status the records and tuples. And also, just on the actual repo itself, people keep asking, what is the status of this. And I am not sure what it is, whether I still like in the design space. So I am going to present some ideas today, I am not necessarily proposing the Stage 3, like NRO told me to do. I am more trying to just kind encourage discussion. Especially from people—from everyone, especially from people have not anything about, I would love to encourage new voices in this area as well. Because we have been talking about this for four or five years now. And new voices are always very, very welcome.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: Hi, everyone. It’s been a while since we talked about Records and Tuples. Almost a year. I thought it would be a good one first to chat about it again. So it’s technically a Stage 2 proposal, but let’s not worry about that too much. NRO noticed that whenever a TC39 proposal makes it on to hacker news, it’s almost inevitable that someone in the comments will be asking about the status of records and tuples. And also, just on the actual repo itself, people keep asking "what is the status of this?". And I am not sure what that status is exactly. So I am going to present some ideas today, I am not proposing this for Stage 3 today. I am more trying to just encourage discussion. Especially from people—from every one of course, but I would love to encourage new voices in this area as well. Because we have been talking about this for four or five years now. And new voices are always very, very welcome.
```

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g334e668a325_0_0]

> ACE: So to catch people up, that haven’t been following kind of all the things over the years, for many years, the proposal was all around adding new primitives. And they had === semantics and typeof that included comparisons here where the special casing things for connecting zero. And then we thought we were kind getting ready for Stage 3, we were kind of changing little bits of the proposal. But these fundamentals things had not changed for a long time. And these fundamentals actually turned out, not appetite to do them. It’s just—for various reasons. Since then we have been a I will bit back to the drawing board on what can we do here? Because I am convinced we can do something. I think this is something that is lacking in the language. And I am sure there is something, that we can do. I just don’t know what it is yet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: So to catch people up, that haven’t been following kind of all the things over the years, for many years, the proposal was all around adding new primitives. And they had === semantics and typeof that included comparisons here where there is special handing for negative zero. And then we thought we were kind getting ready for Stage 3, we were kind of only changing little bits of the proposal. These fundamentals things had not changed for a long time. And these fundamentals actually turned out, there was not appetite to do them. It’s just—for various reasons. Since then we have been back to the drawing board on "what can we do here?". Because I am convinced we can do something. I think this is something that is lacking in the language. And I am sure there is something, that we can do. I just don’t know what it is yet.
```

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g2af82517ce6_0_26]

ACE: So a thing I like, so I went off out in the British desert and meditated, if was up to me, like a special birthday present, ACE you get one freeway design and put it to Stage 4.7, what would I choose?

> ACE: I would choose that there is syntax. I will comment in more detail. I like the syntax. Maybe it doesn’t have to be this sign. I really think we are running out of ASCII characters to be many other things. Initially, it was a bit of a blow, when we were told we can’t have new primitives, but I am come around to that. Peter hoodie said putting the implementation complexity aside as a JavaScript user, I have come around to that, yes, these things should be objects. I think they should be general containers that contain anything. And I think it’s a great opportunity that they also work as a composite key.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: I would choose that there is syntax. I will comment in more detail. I like the syntax. Maybe it doesn’t have to be this sign. I really think we are running out of ASCII characters to be many other things. Initially, it was a bit of a blow, when we were told we can’t have new primitives, but I am come around to that. PHE said putting the implementation complexity aside, as a JavaScript user to would be confusing to have values that look like objects and arrays but are not, I have come around to that, yes, these things should be objects. I think they should be general containers that can contain anything. And I think it’s a great opportunity that they also work as a composite key.
```

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g2af82517ce6_0_39]

> ACE: So syntax. So yeah. There could be no syntax. To say if there is syntax was just about freezing objects, which is there is like set proposal for syntax that is just about freezing and sealing. Then I think there are—the advantages for lots of different actors here, I think reading it, at least, I don’t know how people’s brains work. But when I am looking at this, just the view of parentheses, the noise around the data makes it much more readable. It’s fairly less characters to type. But I think it’s beneficial for the reader, there’s more weight on the reader and the writer. And a tooling team, I like this from a tooling perspective. It’s much easier to just analyze this code and see this is a frozen object. It’s not going to change. As opposed to tracking. If `Object.freeze` is being used, tools, I think Rollup, special cases, calls to `Object.freeze`. If there’s enough indirection, that breaks down, creating an `Object.deepFreeze` utility static analysis tools can’t pierce through that to realize that is happening. Syntax gives you the guarantee that no monkey patching can happen. There’s another advantage, which kind of only makes sense later on. I think there is potentially some kind after runtime advantage. But it doesn’t make sense.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: So syntax. So yeah. There could be no syntax. To say if there is syntax was just about freezing objects, which is there is like set proposal for syntax that is just about freezing and sealing. Then I think there are—the advantages for lots of different actors here, I think reading it, at least, I don’t know how people’s brains work. But when I am looking at this, just the view of parentheses, the noise around the data makes it much more readable. It’s fairly less characters to type. But I think it’s beneficial for the reader, there’s more weight on the reader and the writer. And a tooling team, I like this from a tooling perspective. It’s much easier to just analyze this code and see this is a frozen object. It’s not going to change. As opposed to tracking. If `Object.freeze` is being used, tools, I think Rollup, special cases, calls to `Object.freeze`. If there’s enough indirection, that breaks down, creating a `deepFreeze` utility static analysis tools can’t pierce through that to realize what is happening. Syntax gives you the guarantee that no monkey patching can happen. There’s another advantage, which kind of only makes sense later on. I think there is potentially some kind after runtime advantage. But that only makes sense once I get to the later slides.
```

ACE: An example of what I was just saying, say you are going to be using this syntax for certain global configures, exported from a module. What we can do, as a human and as from a tooling perspective, is I know what those values are without having to see other modules in the universe and check every module that imports this value doesn’t mutate it. That’s a really nice property that I can be sure immediately that this thing is frozen. Again, I think that’s good for both of us in reading this code. I am going to comment on the PR, you are exporting this config. It could be weird if someone somewhere else, someone mutates it. It’s nice to freeze it. The convenience of this encourages these types of patterns. It gives humans like convenience.

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g337bd48536b_3_0]

ACE: But syntax isn’t crucial for this. Like, if there’s really no appetite for syntax, then we don’t have to have it. It could be APIs.

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g2af82517ce6_0_21]

> ACE: So I also, as I said, I have really come around to these being objects because again the point that Peter hoodie made was, if you are going to adopt these things, there’s already a lot of code out there that is kind of sniffing, you’re going to reflect the properties of values in the language. You might have some utility that is overloaded. You can maybe pass it. A Number or Array of Numbers and the way it works out the overload is using `Array.isArray`. And now, if we have these tuple things, like arrays but they don’t pass `Array.isArray`, then that utility no longer works. So you would have to update or not use this thing. So if these things are objects and they are arrays and they are inherent from the prototypes that others might expect, there’s a larger chance that you could just adopt these. I think there’s also a benefit to people learning the language, the typeof is something tends to be something that immediately, like, Chapter 1, when you open the book, these are the call parts of the language. More like, think, immutable data structures are really, really, really useful and something you want to learn about sooner than later. I don’t it’s necessarily Chapter 1, page 1 concepts. But overall, I think I will like them being objects. The reason they weren’t objects in the proposal is because it helps explain from a kind of modelling aspect of how the language collects some other behaviors. But I think the weighting is actually crucial in the matrix.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: So I also, as I said, I have really come around to these being objects because again the point that PHE made was, if you are going to adopt these things, there’s already a lot of code out there that is kind of sniffing, you’re going to reflect the properties of values in the language. You might have some utility that is overloaded. You can maybe pass it a number or array of numbers and the way it works out the overload is using `Array.isArray`. And now, if we have these tuple things, like arrays but they don’t pass `Array.isArray`, then that utility no longer works. So you would have to update or not use this thing. So if these things are objects and they are arrays and they inherent from the prototypes that others might expect, there’s a larger chance that you could just adopt these. I think there’s also a benefit to people learning the language, the typeof is something tends to be something that immediately, like, Chapter 1, when you open the book, these are the core parts of the language. More like, think, immutable data structures are really, really, really useful and something you want to learn about sooner than later. I don’t it’s necessarily Chapter 1, page 1 concepts. But overall, I think I will like them being objects. The reason they weren’t objects in the proposal is because it helps explain from a kind of modelling aspect of how the language collects some other behaviors. But I think the weighting is actually crucial in the matrix.
```

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g2c6eebea946_0_5]

> ACE: So the other part about the proposal is that it was kind of always about we found the original commits. 2019, and back then, it was—these things are deeply immutable. The only thing you could put in them were other Records and Tuples and primitives. And again the feedback we got on that was that’s great. But it really cuts off a lot of language. Like, maybe for designing the language from scratch, we could do that. But the kind has already sailed. Pretty much everything in the language is mutable unless you do work to stop it being that way. And I just felt really sorry for the people that are going to use the new things we are building, like Temporal, which is fantastic, and has an immutable data model. So if someone thinks I am using immutable data, these aren’t like old school dates, where they are internal mutable and you can change what type they point to. Everything in Temporal, data model is these things. Are mutable, but mutable objects. You can add new properties to them. From like a perspective of records and tuples, the thing has to be frozen or stabled or fixed, like from marks, then it would cutoff large parts of the language, even things from a user’s perspective, do follow the roll of being I am mutable. And I think maybe they’re still ways that, you know, linting tool might be spot little mistakes where people have immutability. We talked about having a box like object that lets you opt out, you have to code into the data model and makes it much harder to adopt

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: So the other part about the proposal is that it was kind of always about we found the original commits. 2019, and back then, it was—these things are deeply immutable. The only thing you could put in them were other Records and Tuples and primitives. And again the feedback we got on that was that’s great. But it really cuts off a lot of language. Like, maybe for designing the language from scratch, we could do that. But the ship has already sailed. Pretty much everything in the language is mutable unless you do work to stop it being that way. And I just felt really sorry for the people that are going to use the new things we are building, like Temporal, which is fantastic, and has an immutable data model. So if someone thinks "I am using immutable data", these aren’t like old school dates, where they are internal mutable and you can change what type they point to. Everything in Temporal, data model is these things are immutable, but still actually mutable objects. You can add new properties to them. From like a perspective of records and tuples, the thing has to be frozen or stabled or fixed, like from MM, then it would cutoff large parts of the language, even things from a user’s perspective, do follow the roll of being I am mutable. And I think maybe they’re still ways that, you know, linting tool might be spot little mistakes where people have immutability. We talked about having a box like object that lets you opt out, you have to code into the data model and makes it much harder to adopt.
```

WH: I wasn’t talking about shared structs. Simple structs.

DE: Okay. Yeah. I don’t have a solution to that yet. This is falsely coupling mutability. And nominal and having methods. But I think that’s okay because similar to how we coupled privacy with classes, when you have something immutable it’s often data. False coupling.

WH: Okay.

SYG: Yeah. DE mentioned initializer lists. The biggest—I agree. That it’s pretty cool to have immutable structs, shared structs notwithstanding for now. The problem is basically, if you want user constructors, like the way it works today in the proposal is that you get this one shot initialization by the time any of this value is escaped to user code it has the own properties that are declared already on it. And then, you know, you can mutate it. But if you want something to be born immutable, that won’t work. So then you have the problem of, well, how do you limit the access to this thing while it’s in this initialization phase, after that is over, it is then immutable.

ACE: Yeah

SYG: I don’t know the solution to that. If we do, that would be nice.

> ACE: Yeah. But a similar thing in JavaScript, you can—for them it’s easier because the syntax isn’t this stock filled. You can say fill = and it understands that. Like, I have ideas in mind. I can share in Matrix later. Please the possibility of an immutable structs is around.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: Yeah. But a similar thing in Java's Valhalla, for them it’s easier because the syntax isn't `this.field =`. You can say `field =` and it understands that. Like, I have ideas in mind. I can share in Matrix later. I'm pleased the possibility of an immutable struct is around.
```

WH: WeakMaps work for keys which are objects. But look at the last two key parts on the slide, which are primitives and can’t be put into a WeakMap. Don’t these leak?

ACE: Yes, so the trick here is, this is like lots of like NPM libraries, they leak if you create like you keep creating keys, they all share the same object, but have a different BigInt and keep leak because they rely on the objects going away. But the way to mitigate that, which I have done in my implementation is, you have a FinalizationRegistry on the composite key and if that is finalized, you clean up in the reverse direction. You move the entry from this where the map is zero, you tell the map above you to remove the entry. It cleans up in the reverse direction. So that kind of helps these things not leak. It’s very easy to make them leak. If you hold them wrong.

> ACE: The other kind of downside of keys—let’s say records and tuples, similar to what Shu was saying, if these were shared structs there’s a cost to allocating shared structs. If you were creating the immutable data structs, just to get the immutableness of them, and not because they are planning on doing `===`, they will pay a cost creation time that they will never claim. You have to do this work eagerly to do this at all. That’s a bit after shame. People might say “please don’t use this here because they’re too slow to create”.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: The other kind of downside of keys—let’s say records and tuples, similar to what SYG was saying, if these were shared structs there’s a cost to allocating shared structs. If you were creating the immutable data structs, just to get the immutableness of them, and not because they are planning on doing `===`, they will pay a cost creation time that they will never claim. You have to do this work eagerly to do this at all. That’s a bit after shame. People might say “please don’t use this here because they’re too slow to create”.
```

> ACE: I’m pretty sure this causes GC complexity that we could see as an opportunity for some really good GC research or say that’s the reason we wouldn’t go in this direction. And you have to—I think there are people in committee that want negative zero and in turn means you don’t get negative zero. It’s another thing that the MDM library always get wrong. They always forget about negative zero.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: I’m pretty sure this causes GC complexity that we could see as an opportunity for some really good GC research or say that’s the reason we wouldn’t go in this direction. And you have to—I think there are people in committee that want negative zero and in turn means you don’t get negative zero. It’s another thing that the NPM library always get wrong. They always forget about negative zero.
```

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g336fbd25823_0_47]

> ACE: So going back to my meditating in the desert image, I was thinking you don’t necessarily have to intern these thing. What we have is an opportunity. If we added these to the language, we kind of get this one time or this one opportunity to decide what the semantics are. And we could say that these new things added to the language have new behavior, like, they introduce a new capability to steal a word from DE’s slides that haven’t been presented yet, we can say in particular APIs in the language even if the things are triple equal to each other, they could still be treated equal in certain APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: So going back to my meditating in the desert image, I was thinking you don’t necessarily have to intern these thing. What we have is an opportunity. If we added these to the language, we kind of get this one time or this one opportunity to decide what the semantics are. And we could say that these new things added to the language have new behavior, like, they introduce a new capability to steal a word from DE’s slides that haven’t been presented yet, we can say in particular APIs in the language even if the things are not triple equal to each other, they could still be treated equal in certain APIs.
```

> ACE: So maybe we could actually say when you use these things in a map, the map kind of snips them, sees they’re records and tuples and applies the notation and this line here would work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ACE: So maybe we could actually say when you use these things in a map, the map kind of checks them, sees they’re records and tuples and applies the notation and this line here would work.
```

[Slide: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uONn7T91lfZDV4frCsxpwd1QB_pU3P7F6V2j9jEPnA8/edit#slide=id.g2af82517ce6_0_31]

ACE: Why could we possibly do that? I think we could do that if we wanted to because they wouldn’t kind of violate any of the kind of requirements we would put on maps and sets today. Like, these things would be stable, fixed in MM’s kind of world. The equality that they could offer would meet all of the existing kind of equality rules that we need for the map and a set. So they wouldn’t violate kind of any of the things that we would want a map and a set key to do today. And it would be backwards compatible because these things don’t exist.

KG: It has not been clear to me throughout this presentation whether these were triple equals or not.

> ACE: It’s not clear to me either. I think they can’t be, because I don’t think we’ll be able to – I’m putting words in implementer’s mouth. I think implementers will say, yes, that will be too slow because maybe there’s a way that in-turning costs could be reduced. From everything I’ve been told and everything I kind of understand about the engines, I feel like the same view that we adopt from these being primitives applies here and that them being triple equal would be nice from a semantic point of view but I think the fact that these things are actually going to run and be performative means they wouldn’t be.
> 
> DE: I’ve been assuming they’re not triple equals as well. And this is because the previous time that records and tuples were proposed for Stage 3, we got extremely explicit feedback from implementers that neither strategy would work, not in-turning because the cost is too high and doing the deep comparison in place because it’s too important that triple equals on objects is just a pointer comparison. So the proposal that Ashley is talking about tries to work within that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ACE: It’s not clear to me either. I think they can’t be, because I don’t think we’ll be able to – I’m putting words in implementer’s mouth. I think implementers will say, yes, that will be too slow because maybe there’s a way that interning costs could be reduced. From everything I’ve been told and everything I kind of understand about the engines, I feel like the same view that we adopt from these being primitives applies here and that them being triple equal would be nice from a semantic point of view but I think the fact that these things are actually going to run and be performative means they wouldn’t be.

DE: I’ve been assuming they’re not triple equals as well. And this is because the previous time that records and tuples were proposed for Stage 3, we got extremely explicit feedback from implementers that neither strategy would work, not interning because the cost is too high and doing the deep comparison in place because it’s too important that triple equals on objects is just a pointer comparison. So the proposal that Ashley is talking about tries to work within that
```
